# **Building a Prometheus Server**
## **Introduction**
Prometheus is a powerful tool for monitoring your infrastructure. Getting started with Prometheus is as easy as setting up a single Prometheus server. There are multiple ways to install Prometheus. In this lab, you will have the opportunity to set up a Prometheus server by installing Prometheus from pre-compiled binaries made available by the Prometheus team.

## **Solution**
Log in to the server using the credentials provided:

    ssh cloud_user@<PUBLIC_IP_ADDRESS>
Note: When copying and pasting code into Vi from the lab guide, first enter *`:set`* paste (and then *`i`* to enter insert mode) to avoid adding unnecessary spaces and hashes.


### **Download and Install Prometheus**
1. Create the `prometheus` user:

       sudo useradd -M -r -s /bin/false prometheus

2. Create the `prometheus` directories:

       sudo mkdir /etc/prometheus /var/lib/prometheus

3. Download the pre-compiled binaries:

       wget https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/releases/download/v2.16.0/prometheus-2.16.0.linux-amd64.tar.gz

4. Extract the binaries:

       tar xzf prometheus-2.16.0.linux-amd64.tar.gz prometheus-2.16.0.linux-amd64/

5. Move the files from the downloaded archive to the appropriate locations, and set ownership on these files and directories to the `prometheus` user:

       sudo cp prometheus-2.16.0.linux-amd64/{prometheus,promtool} /usr/local/bin/
       
       sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /usr/local/bin/{prometheus,promtool}
       
       sudo cp -r prometheus-2.16.0.linux-amd64/{consoles,console_libraries} /etc/prometheus/
       
       sudo cp prometheus-2.16.0.linux-amd64/prometheus.yml /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml
       
       sudo chown -R prometheus:prometheus /etc/prometheus
       
       sudo chown prometheus:prometheus /var/lib/prometheus
       
6. Run Prometheus in the foreground to make sure everything is set up correctly so far:

       prometheus --config.file=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml

    In the output, we should see a message stating, `"Server is ready to receive web requests."`

7. Press **Ctrl+C** to stop the process.

## **Configure Prometheus as a `systemd` Service**

1. Create a `systemd` unit file for Prometheus:

       sudo vi /etc/systemd/system/prometheus.service

2. Define the Prometheus service in the unit file:

       [Unit]
       Description=Prometheus Time Series Collection and Processing Server
       Wants=network-online.target
       After=network-online.target

       [Service]
       User=prometheus
       Group=prometheus
       Type=simple
       ExecStart=/usr/local/bin/prometheus \
           --config.file /etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml \
           --storage.tsdb.path /var/lib/prometheus/ \
           --web.console.templates=/etc/prometheus/consoles \
           --web.console.libraries=/etc/prometheus/console_libraries

       [Install]
       WantedBy=multi-user.target

3. Save and exit the file by pressing Escape followed by `wq!`.

4. Make sure `systemd` picks up the changes we made:

       sudo systemctl daemon-reload

5. Start the Prometheus service:

       sudo systemctl start prometheus

6. Enable the Prometheus service so it will automatically start at boot:

       sudo systemctl enable prometheus

7. Verify the Prometheus service is healthy:

       sudo systemctl status prometheus

    We should see its state is `active (running)`.

8. Press **Ctrl+C** to stop the process.

9. Make an HTTP request to Prometheus to verify it is able to respond:

       curl localhost:9090

    The result should be `<a href="/graph">Found</a>`.

10. In a new browser tab, access Prometheus by navigating to `http://<PROMETHEUS_SERVER_PUBLIC_IP>:9090` (replacing `<PROMETHEUS_SERVER_PUBLIC_IP>` with the IP listed on the lab page). We should then see the Prometheus expression browser.

## **Conclusion**

Congratulations on successfully completing this hands-on lab!